% Spillover power calculations
% 13 Jan 2020

# Methods

## Theory

Imagine you can conjure up independent pairs of populations (e.g., states)
with two adjustable/selectable attributes:

1. A difference in antibiotic use $\Delta \tau$ that determines a true (but
   hidden) difference in antibiotic resistance $\Delta \rho$ between the two
   populations.
1. An amount of interaction $\varepsilon$.

For simplicity, imagine you picked many pairs of populations with the same
$\Delta \tau$, half of which have no interactions ($\varepsilon = 0$) and
half of which have some fixed amount of interaction ($\varepsilon > 0$).

The number of pairs required to detect a bystander effect ---i.e., that
pairs with higher $\varepsilon$ have lower $\Delta \rho$ for the same
$\Delta \tau$--- will depend on:

1. The difference in resistance $\left. \Delta \rho
   \right|_{\varepsilon=0}$ between the non-interacting states (bigger is
   better)
1. The amount of interaction in the interacting populations (bigger
   $\varepsilon$ is better)
1. The accuracy of measuring resistance in a population $\sigma_\rho$
   (smaller $\sigma_\rho$ is better)

I'll use the $t$-test power calculations to get the number of interacting
and non-interacting pairs we need to reach 80% power to detect spillover.

The power calculation is a function of the effect size $d$, which is the
difference in use-resistance associations between the interacting and
non-interaction populations divided by the standard deviation (i.e.,
measurement error) of the associations. Writing $A = \Delta \rho / \Delta
\tau$, the effect size is:
$$
d = \frac{A(0) - A(\varepsilon)}{\sigma_A}
$$

To get the numerator of $d$, I look at the the 2-population model
simulations, which show that the use-resistance association $A = \Delta
\rho / \Delta \tau$ decays exponentially with increasing interaction
$\varepsilon$:
$$
A(\varepsilon) = A(0) e^{-\varepsilon/\varepsilon_0}
$$
The parameter $\varepsilon_0$ is the amount of interaction at which the
use-resistance association falls to $1/e$ of its value when the populations are completely separate.

To get the denominator of $d$, I assume that $\Delta \tau$ is measured with
good accuracy and has negligible variance compared to the variance in
measuring resistance. Thus:
$$
\sigma_A
  = \mathrm{SD} \left[ \frac{\Delta \rho}{\Delta \tau} \right]
  = \frac{\sqrt{2}}{\Delta \tau} \sigma_\rho
$$
(The factor of 2 comes from $\mathrm{Var}[\rho_2 - \rho_1] = 2
\,\mathrm{Var}[\rho]$.)

Putting this together:
$$
d = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}} \frac{\left. \Delta \rho \right|_{\varepsilon=0}}{\sigma_\rho} \left( 1 - e^{-\varepsilon/\varepsilon_0} \right)
$$

## Parameters

And for reasonable parameter guesses:

- Fitting simulations from the WHN model gives $\varepsilon_0 \approx 0.05$.
- Getting 10 percentage points difference in resistance is pretty strong,
  so say $\Delta \rho = 0.1$.
- What's the error in measurements of resistance? The SD of residuals in
  linear regressions (i.e., $\sigma_\phi$ for $\rho = \mu + \beta \tau +
  \phi$) is $0.05$, i.e., 5 percentage points. That doesn't seem crazy to
  me: a typical error in measurement of a state's resistance is easily 5
  p.p. 
- Adjacent states have commuting proportions up to about 1%, so let's set
  $\varepsilon = 10^{-2}$.

# Results

With these parameters, we need 240 pairs of states interacting states and
another 240 pairs of non-interacting states.

## Sensitivity analysis

If we tweak these parameters to make them more favorable to us, what do we get?

- If the spillover effect were stronger ($\varepsilon_0 = 0.01$), then $N = 21$ (i.e., $N$ interacting and $N$ non-interacting pairs, for $2N = 42$ total pairs and $4N = 84$ total populations).
- Much stronger differences in resistance ($\Delta \rho = 0.2$, i.e., 20 p.p.) gives $N=61$ (244 total populations).
- If measurements of resistance were really good ($\sigma_\rho = 0.01$), then $N = 11$ (44 total populations).
- If we picked even more interacting populations ($\varepsilon = 0.1$), then $N = 12$ (48 total populations).

# Discussion

Notably, even with some ambitious parameters, we don't have enough states.
Even with $N=11$, you need 22 *independent pairs* of populations, i.e., 44
states without any undesirable correlations.

So I can now see a paper that does this:

1. Like in the current paper, show the 2-population models, to see that the
   model exhibits spillover. (But now the model is extra useful, because we
   get the parameter $\varepsilon_0$ from it.) Keep as Fig 1.
1. Lay out the power calculation above.
1. Show some observational use-resistance data (currently in Fig 2) to
   motivate estimates of $\Delta \rho$ and $\sigma_\rho$. (We can squeeze
   some more juice out of that data by estimating $\sigma_rho$ from the
   residuals of linear regressions.) Keep as Fig 2.
1. Show the commuting data (currently Supp Fig) to justify picking
   $\varepsilon = 10^{-2}$. Show as Fig 3.
1. Do the power calculation and sensitivity analyses.
1. Show the simplest of the analyses on the observational data, as a
   gut-check that the confidence intervals on the spillover effect are
   wide. Could be Fig 4 or a supplement.

This means a paper pretty similar to what we have, but with:

- Swapping out the more complex methods to detect observational spillover
  effects, and swapping in the power calculation
- Re-writing the Discussion to saying that it seems very unlikely that
  we'll be able to detect spillover at the level of states (unless our
  measurements of resistance get really, really precise). This means we
  need other laboratories of resistance.
